---
title: ACID Properties
date: 2021-01-24 15:40:00 +/-TTTT
categories: [Database, ACID Properties]
tags: [acid, database, relational_database]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) is a set of properties of database transactions intended to guarantee data validity despite errors, power failures, and other mishaps. 

To understand ACID completely, we need to know about **transaction**.

## Transaction
A transaction is a collection of queries or a single unit of work performed within a database management system against a database.

Ex. Account Deposit (SELECT, UPDATE): Send $100 from account-1 to account-2

```sql
BEGIN TX1
SELECT balance FROM account WHERE id=1
balance > 100
UPDATE account SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id=1
UPDATE account SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id=2
COMMIT TX1
```

## Atomicity

An atomic transaction is a transcation that will rollback all queries, If one of the queries fails. All queries must succeed.

```sql
BEGIN TX1
SELECT val FROM dummy_table WHERE id=1
val > 10
UPDATE dummy_table SET val = val - 10 WHERE id=1

/* DATABASE CRASHED - Due to some external fault */
```

| Before Transaction | | After Transaction | |
|---|---|
| id | val | id | val |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1  | 100  | 1 | 90 |
| 2  | 20  | 2 | 20 |

> :warning: After we restarted the machine the val has been debited but the other val has not been credited yet.


## Isolation

Isolation controls how and when changes are made and when they are visible to each other, users and programs. One of the purposes of Isolation is to allow multiple transactions to take place simultaneously without adversely affecting each transaction.

Lack of Isolation generates **read phenomena**. Some of the common read phenomena are discussed below:

### Read Phenomena

1. **Dirty Reads**
- During a transaction we read changes made by some other transaction which is not commited yet. If the other transaction rollback it's changes then, we have read a value that doesn't exist in the table.

2. **Non-Repeatable Reads**
- During a transaction the result we get from same queries is not equal.
- Reason for this would be that between the executation of the query for the second time. Some other transaction committed changes to the database which changed the value of the field that we quered before.

3. **Phantom Reads**
- A phantom read occurs when, in the course of a transaction, new rows are added or removed by another transaction to the records being read.

4. **Lost Updates**
- Some other transaction overwrote the values that we were about to commit.
- The changes made by a transaction is overwritten by some other transaction before the first transaction commits.

### Isolation Levels

Isolation levels fixes read phenomena

1. **Read Uncommitted**
- This simply means no Isolation, any change from outside is visible to the transaction.

2. **Read Committed**
- Each query in a transaction only sees the committed stuff.

3. **Repeatable Read**
- Each query in a transaction only sees changes committed at the beginning of the transaction.

4. **Serializable**
- Transactions are serialized. So, they can't be run parallely.

### Isolation levels v/s Read phenomena

| **Isolation Level** | **Dirty Reads** | **Lost Updates** | **Non-Repeating Reads** | **Phantom Read** |
|:-------------------:|:---------------:|:----------------:|:-----------------------:|:----------------:|
| Read Uncommitted    | May Occur       | May Occur        | May Occur               | May Occur        |
| Read Committed      | Don't Occur     | May Occur        | May Occur               | May Occur        |
| Repeatable Read     | Don't Occur     | Don't Occur      | Don't Occur             | May Occur        |
| Serializable        | Don't Occur     | Don't Occur      | Don't Occur             | Don't Occur      |

> If we Implement **versioning** with repeatable read then we might get away with phantom reads.

## Consistency

Consistency in database systems refers to the need for any given database transactions to change the affected data only in permitted ways. Any data recorded in the database must operate in accordance with all specified rules, including issues, cascades, causes, and other combinations.

Atomicity and Isolation leads to Consistency

1. **Consistency in Data**
- Defined by the user. (Eg. Number of likes must not be greater than views)
- Referential Integrity (Foregin Keys)
- Atomicity
- Isolation

2. **Consistency in reads**
- If a transaction committed a change, will a new transaction immediately see the changes?
- Relational and NOSQL database suffer form this.

## Durability

Durability guarantees that transactions that have committed will survive permanently. For example, if a flight booking reports that a seat has successfully been booked, then the seat will remain booked even if the system crashes.

To achieve durability: 
- Committed transactions must be persisted in a durable non-volatile storage.
- **Redis is not a durable database. It is a mem cache/memory database**